---
title: Lesson 1 - What even is a webpage?
date: "2019-03-12T20:10:37.121Z"
---

Obviously the simple answer is the very thing you are looking at, but
importantly what do we consider a 'web page'? Well there is quite a lot of
history to that, and I really suggest reading up on the birth of the web and all
the great stuff Mr Berners-Lee has given the world - in fact today marks 30
years since the first HTTP communication happened. So let's jump straight
into...

## HTML

This is the fundamental building blocks of a webpage, it is the 'extension' of
the web if you like. Like a JPG is to images HTML is to websites. At it's core
it contains 'tags' which describe the structure and content of a webpage.
Without HTML there is no webpage. When you load a page your browser will actually
go off to where you have directed it (the url e.g. http://www.bbc.co.uk) and ask
the computer at the other end to give back HTML. Your browser then downloads
that HTML to your computer and 'renders' it by 'parsing' the text it finds. The
text in HTML is written in a 'tags' or 'markup' and these 'tags' represent
different things, like an `img` represents an image or a `h2` represents a
second order heading (i.e. not the biggest, that would be `h1`). This is going
to be covered in much more detail going forward. The other thing your browser
will do with the HTML is find 'assets' and these can range from files that you
consume, like images, vides or sound, or things that 'enrich' the webpage which
are 'CSS' and 'Javascript' - which your browser also knows what to do with.

## CSS

So if HTML is the structure CSS is the painting and decorating. It decides how
things look, that `img` is going to be this big or that `h2` is going to be this
type of font. CSS can do so many different things, from deciding which fonts are
used where all the way to drawing the
[Simpsons](https://pattle.github.io/simpsons-in-css/). Again much more detail
will follow in coming posts.

## Javascript

So we have the structure in HTML and the styles in CSS, what Javascript gives us
is interactivity! It can make simple things come alive, it can make your webpage
change as it goes and fetches data from other places, it can even make games!
Javascript as a whole has come a really long way in recent years, and is a fully
fledged software language in it's own right. It originally started as a
scripting language purely to make things work on webpages that didn't fit inside
the standard 'HTML' or 'CSS' models but has subsequently become a very fast and
exciting language.

## So what now?

Well the first thing to learn is the fundamentals. So Lesson 2 will focus on
HTML and elements.